I told you to sit down because
today's topic will be a bit longer.
Keep in mind that I have been
working on this for five months
I believe it is very important
to pass it on to you.
I managed to summarize.
Most of these observations
and revelations came from traveling
throughout Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina
working with many young people, and through
long prayer and theological examination.
I want to share them with
you. Since these are very sensitive topics
You know usually when
a topic is very sensitive
the common folk say: 'Let's
not stir the pot', let it remain calm.
However, precisely in those sensitive
areas, the pearl is often hidden."
I remember when I was talking
about this topic at the men's formation
I mentioned the Grimm brothers'
fairy tale about Iron John.
Are you familiar with that tale?
As Tolkien was often in God's spirit,
I believe the Grimm brothers were also.
Anyway, I'll shorten it to the maximum.
It's about an enchanted lake in the forest.
There was an enchanted lake in the forest,
and many people who went
into that forest would disappear.
Then, one young man had a good
idea and went there with his dog.
He watched where the dog went,
and the dog was the first to perish.
Then, he informed the king exactly where that
enchanted lake with living mud was located.
Inside, they found a monster
they called the Wild Man
They imprisoned him in the
royal palace and he was exposed.
And now, the king's son, the prince,
was playing with a golden ball
which is a common motif in fairy tales.
In fact, it is taken from the Bible.
We see that even in
"The Lord of the Rings," there is that ring
for which people were willing
to risk everything. A very common motif.
Actually, this motif emerges from the Gospel
when Jesus speaks about the precious pearl
that a person, once he finds it, is
willing to sell everything for that pearl.
Sell everything and buy that field
where he found that pearl.
This represents something
precious in our life, in our soul
something for which we are sure is
the purpose of our existence, God's will.
All people who have indeed known God
and achieved holiness in life here on Earth
no matter how difficult it was for them,
no matter how persecuted they were
like Padre Pio, and when they told him
to share those struggles with someone
he said: "I won't, I don't want to
give anyone the sweetest part."
So, this boy was playing
with the golden ball
and it fell out of the window and
ended up in the wild man's cage.
What was significant then,
especially as it was a male formation,
was that the key to that cage
was under his mother's pillow.
And that is very interesting.
We know that as young men, as the
Holy Scriptures say, we should learn to
separate ourselves from our parents, from
our mother in order to cling to our wife.
So, he had to somehow take
the key that was under his mother's pillow.
The symbolism is much deeper.
It's not just about that
it's about the fact that
there are certain family secrets
certain family matters, and sins
that must not be talked about.
How much it burdened our people.
From what I've heard in many family stories,
Bleiburg couldn't be mentioned for fifty years.
Your grandfather died, your
uncle died, that's not talked about.
You must not talk about it.
The conversation starts about the war
I've been in that family's home
Father has PTSD, so the son knows
something's not right with his father
the story begins, no! silence!
it's not talked about.
That's how we keep locked-up memories
and we never get to the pearl.
But this guy gathered his courage
took the key that was
under his mother's pillow
and unlocked the cage of the wild man.
The wild man didn't attack him.
Grimm describes the eight
stages of his maturation there.
Through those stages, he learned to
deal with the wild man in himself.
That's what we need to do.
We need to learn to deal with
those wild things that are locked
that are suppressed
because that's where our pearl is.
What's very important.
This is actually a combination of the
parable of the hidden pearl
and of the strong man who
holds his family, his house tied.
When Jesus speaks
about deliverance in exorcisms
He uses precisely that parable
(Luke 11:21-22)
"When a strong man, fully armed, guards
his own house, his possessions are safe."
"But when someone stronger attacks
and overpowers him, that is Christ
he takes away the armor in which the
man trusted and divides up the spoils."
In Matthew 12, 29
"Or else how can one enter into
a strong man's house, and spoil his goods
except he first bind the strong
man? Then he will spoil his house."
We will have to enter into that struggle,
into wrestling with that wild man.
Why? To get to that pearl.
I've met many believers who don't live
even near the fulfillment and
the plan that God had for them
precisely because they lack the courage
to engage in a battle with themselves
to deal with those monsters from the closet,
their family history, their personal history
and to allow Christ, the stronger
man, to enter and bind the strong man.
So that doesn't happen to us,
we'll go through five very tricky points
precisely to find direction for the future
because I believe these topics will be
very important. They are important today
and they will be very
important in the future.
It is the relationship between faith and
nationalism, that is, faith and patriotism.
We see that many troubles, wars, and conflicts
have happened precisely because of this
and there were few
formed believers who knew
when some ideology or war threatened
to take and choose the right standpoint
small number, a very small number.
That's where the curse fell
on our people and our families.
Find where that healthy boundary is
What the difference is between patriotism
or love of country and nationalism.
That will be very important for us.
The second is nurturing family and
national memory. What I just mentioned.
Since it's often difficult and burdensome
we decide not to enter that space, yet
that is precisely where many solutions lie.
Third, when we discover what it is about
the prayer for the ancestors. There is so
much controversy about that in the church.
It's interesting to note that many
individuals who did not directly encounter
human plight and suffering
have unique "smart" perspectives.
That's why we want to hear what the catechism
tells us, what the Church's experience tells us
and how we actually
pray for the deceased.
The terminology we
use is also very important.
We will learn not to fall into those
traps again and avoid extremes.
Fourth
very important for our time,
are there chosen nations today?
The heresy that often
exists about messianic nations.
So many times has that misled people.
And yet, we see that God uses
some nations in a particular way
It is also very important to find a healthy
balance there. These are very tricky areas.
Fifth.
The question of our diaspora.
Is God calling them to be light where
they are, or is He calling them to return?
We will see that the return has a very, very
deep biblical and theological dimension.
Those are the five points
we will deal with today. Why?
Pope Francis has given
a great diagnosis of today's society.
We have a problem,
and the Pope offers a cure.
The Pope calls
today's society an uprooted society.
In his book
"God is Young," the Pope says this:
The journalist asks him
since the Pope has diagnosed the problem of
today's world, especially of young people
is uprootedness, an uprooted society.
The Pope gives this diagnosis.
By an uprooted society, I mean a society
made up of people and families who are
losing little by little their connections
that life tissue so important
for us  to feel part of each other
to feel with others as participants in a
joint endeavor and common in a broader sense.
Society is rooted if it belongs to history
then it belongs to others in
the best sense of the word.
On the contrary, it is uprooted if young
people grow up in families without history
without memory, and thus without roots.
Since childhood,
we all know how important roots are.
Precisely physically, if there
are no roots, every wind throws us around.
That's why, as parents and family, as
shepherds, we should primarily think about
the areas where we will root ourselves,
create connections, and develop a life network
that will enable us to feel at home.
Alienation is terrible for a person,
the sense of not having roots
of not belonging to anyone.
There's nothing worse than
feeling like a stranger at home
without the principle of equality
that you would share with other people.
Our roots make us less
alone and more complete.
Individuals who are not
aware of their own roots
I know from my own experience, are
the most susceptible to manipulation.
Jesus strength was in
knowing where he came from,
where he was going,
and what his goal was.
And when he argued with the Pharisees,
in the eighth chapter of John's Gospel
He clearly provokes the
Pharisees and tells them:
"Yes, but I know where I came from
and where I am going, but you do not know."
And this is a problem that I especially
encounter with young people today.
The responsibility often lies with you,
the older ones.
The Pope also emphasizes this.
Let's do it like this:
I'll ask only the young ones now,
and then I'll ask the older ones later.
Who told you more?
I ask you, young people, first.
About your roots, about your history,
about the place where you come from?
Grandparents or fathers and mothers?
Raise your hands if your
grandparents told stories.
Okay. And those whose
fathers and mothers told more stories?
Great. Now, let's go back a little
before the time of indoctrination.
Those of you who are a bit older
Who told you more? Fathers
and mothers? You can raise your hands.
No one. Ah, there are some.
Grandparents?
Many more.
The Pope comes to the same conclusion,
one of the solutions he offers is dialogue
between the older and the younger generation.
Listen to this brilliant text
brought to us by Pope Francis.
"I believe dialogue is a powerful
way to save ourselves
a dialogue between the young and the old.
Interaction between the older and younger,
even temporarily skipping the adults.
The young and the old need to talk,
and even more often. It's imperative.
Both older and younger
generations should take the initiative.
Passage in the Bible that goes like this:
"Your old men shall dream dreams,
and your young men shall see visions."
The new society rejects both.
It rejects the young
just as it rejects the old.
Yet, for the old, salvation lies in
passing on memories to the young,
which makes them
true dreamers of the future.
On the other hand, salvation for the
young lies in receiving those teachings,
those dreams and
continuing to live them in prophecy.
For our young to see visions and be dreamers
themselves, to boldly face the future,
it's necessary for them to listen to the
prophetic dreams of their ancestors.
Old dreamers and young prophets—that is the
path of salvation for our uprooted society.
Two generations of
derelicts can save everything.
The Pope gives the recipe:
old dreamers and young prophets.
We see what the world is doing today.
We have a remedy:
let the old go to nursing homes
and let the young be raised
by the state and the media.
But there is a great danger that if we
remain passive to what is happening
we will lose touch with our roots
and be blown away by the winds that are
blowing more and more strongly around us.
There won't be any of us.
My goal here is not to scare you,
but trust me, it's happening.
It's already happening in our society today.
Will we remain passive?
Will we allow the perversions our
grandparents never even imagined existed
never even mentioned,
to become part of our children's lives?
That's why it's crucial
to raise young people
who will know very well where
they came from and where they're going.
Youth and history.
When we talk about getting to know history
we're not only talking about our family history
but specifically about national history as well.
And here we come to the first tricky topic:
Relationship between belief and patriotism.
(1. Faith and patriotism)
How many times has this been abused?
So many times the nationalization of the church
or sacralization of the nation has happened.
And it always had
catastrophic consequences.
Yet, we must find that
healthy middle ground.
That's why I've decided to walk
with you through the Holy Scriptures
The Holy Scripture should always be
our guide in life. As the psalmist says:
The word of God is a lamp to
my feet and alight to my path.
Brothers and sisters, I am speaking to you
from my soul, from my heart, most sincerely
When I was in the most complex
situations both in service and in life
When I honestly came before God
It never happened that the
Lord did not shed light on that situation
and show me a solution through His word.
He was always, always faithful.
Whenever that happened, God's word
enlightened me and showed me the way out.
That's why we'll walk through the
Holy Scriptures and see where
the roots of that healthy patriotism
we need to nurture lie.
This is where I especially
appeal to you, young people.
We must find a middle ground between two
extremes, both of which are demonological.
Exorcists say that
extremes are always diabolical
and that God's way is the middle
one, moderate but without mediocrity.
These two extremes are radical nationalism
Where we consider our people
to be superior, stronger, better
and that gives us
justification to oppress others.
The second extreme is more insidious and dangerous
because these attitudes can be easily recognized.
We can immediately say who is like that
in Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, the more insidious one
is the attitude that no nation exists.
That it doesn't matter at all, that we are
all one, especially if we are Christians.
Why? Because it leads toward
the creation of a new world order
in which there will be one nation,
one language, and one currency.
Why? Because it's much,
much easier to manipulate.
The kingdom of Antichrist
will be able to happen
I'm talking about the Antichrist with a capital
"A", when these conditions are fulfilled.
I don't care about conspiracy theories at all.
Whether it will be tomorrow or in 70-100 years
I'm telling you what is written
in the Holy Scriptures about it.
The Epistle of John, the Epistle to the
Thessalonians, as well as the Revelation.
The Antichrist will bring a false
peace, and it will be on a global level.
That's why there is a very strong movement that
wants to diminish and make the nation unimportant.
This is perhaps best described
in that song by John Lennon.
Imagine there's no heaven;
there are no countries.
Nothing exists; we are all one,
and everything is so beautifully fluid.
It is an uprooted society. I see that many
in the church have fallen into that trap.
And now, how to find a healthy boundary?
Let's go through the Holy Scriptures.
Right at the beginning
In the Genesis 12: 1 God speaks to Abram,
who wasn't yet called Abraham:
"Go from your country, your people and your
father's household to the land I will show you."
God wants to give Abram
a very specific land.
Very specific.
Try touching this to any Jew.
You won't fare well.
And Abraham goes where God showed
him because He wants to give him that land.
Genesis 12:7, Abraham comes to an oak tree
There he builds an altar to the Lord
who appeared to him, and God speaks to him:
"To your offspring, I will give this land."
We see that the biblical
attitude is gratitude to God
who gave us our specific homeland.
Abraham was very careful about
where he would bury his ancestors.
In Genesis 23, there is a discussion, a
trade one, between Abraham and Ephron.
After his wife dies
Abraham wants to buy a specific area
to be the burial place of the patriarchs.
Unfortunately, today it's rarely visited
because Hebron is quite a dangerous area.
Both Muslims, Jews, and
Christians claim Abraham.
It's always tense there, so guides avoid
going there. That's in today's Hebron.
Genesis 23:17-20
"So Ephron's field in Machpelah, near Mamre,
both the field and the cave in it and all the trees
within the borders of the field-was deeded to Abraham
as his property in the presence of all the Hittites.
So the field and the cave in it were deeded
to Abraham by the Hittites as a burial site."
This became a holy place.
This is very relevant today
because we are in the octave for All Saints
when we visit the graves of our ancestors.
It's not just some mere tradition.
Although we believe their souls are
not there, God has sanctified the graves.
We see that Jacob, a patriarch
when they found themselves in
exile due to famine in Egypt.
Jacob was Abraham's grandson
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob
even though he was dying in
Egypt, requested to be buried there.
Genesis 49:29-32. Then he
gave them these instructions:
"I am about to be gathered to
my people. Bury me with my fathers
in the cave in the field of Ephron the Hittite, the
cave in the field of Machpelah, near Mamre in Canaan
which Abraham bought along with the field
as a burial place from Ephron the Hittite.
There Abraham and Sarah were buried, there Isaac
and Rebekah were buried, and there I buried Leah.
The field and the cave in it
were bought from the Hittites."
And then there is an event which,
while I was considering the Bible
strongly reminded me of
the funerals of "guest workers."
Jacob died, and his sons, namely
Joseph, who was a governor of Pharaoh
asked permission to go to another land
from which they had left because
of famine and difficult conditions
to bury his father, Jacob.
And now it describes what
that procession looked like.
Genesis 50: 7-8. 'So Joseph went up to bury his
father. All Pharaoh’s officials accompanied him
the dignitaries of his court
and all the dignitaries of Egypt
besides all the members of Joseph’s household and his
brothers and those belonging to his father’s household.
Only their children and their flocks
and herds were left in Goshen. '
And they went to Israel, which was
devastated by famine, and buried Jacob there.
Doesn't that remind you
of those sad funeral scenes
I used to see in the Bosanska
Posavina, in Herzegovina?
The village, only five
grandmothers left, a grand funeral
fifty German and Austrian
plates, the most expensive cars
it's done, and then everyone goes back.
Joseph, his son, requests the same.
Although he was the first
associate of the Pharaoh
and therefore he had
to be buried in Egypt.
Then he prophesies and
on his deathbed says:
Genesis 50:24-25
Then Joseph said to his
brothers, “I am about to die.
But God will surely come to your
aid and take you up out of this land
to the land he promised on oath
to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.”
Joseph made the Israelites
swear an oath and said:
“God will surely come to your aid, and then
you must carry my bones up from this place.”
And this happened in the Book of Exodus
when the Israelites left after 400 years.
We see it recorded in Exodus 13:19:
Moses took the bones of Joseph with him because
Joseph had made the Israelites swear an oath.
He had said: "God will surely come to your aid,
and then you must carry my bones up with you."
We see how strong an influence and
importance it had for the chosen people.
Great graces often occur in
places where people's ancestors
invoked the Name of God
without them knowing it.
I personally experienced this.
Through maturation and adolescence,
I was also a bit lost on this issue.
My father is from Ugljan
and my mother from Vis.
I have genes from Lika and
Bosnia and various other genes.
But we used to go there; our whole
family always felt it was our own.
I remember all four of us children returning
from Vis after two months of summer
we all cried in the car
as if we were going to jail.
About our roots, because of very difficult family
relationships, disputes, problems, and property
It wasn't allowed to talk about it.
I was really lost. And I remember, at 17
I went alone for the first time with my
grandparents to the island of Ugljan.
There, I spent time with my older
relatives, my grandfather's brothers.
Before, it was boring for me, when older
people start playing cards and drinking a bit.
We always found something more interesting,
but then, it was as if God opened my heart.
I began to hear their heroic stories and the
suffering they endured for their faith in God.
First was on Goli Otok for two
years, second was on Sveti Grgur.
Third fled to Australia
and succeeded there.
When they talked, I saw
strength and pride pouring into me.
I felt so re-rooted again.
We even slaughtered a lamb
there, as our male ritual
which was unthinkable for a city kid.
When I returned to Zagreb,
my mom didn't recognized me.
She said: "You left as a
boy and returned as a man."
It was just those three weeks in which I
realized and became proud of my roots.
Genesis 12:8
Abraham comes near a city
called Bethel, exactly there.
"He went toward the hills east of Bethel and
pitched his tent, between Bethel and Ai.
There he built an altar to the Lord
and called on the name of the Lord."
A specific place,
remember it's about Bethel.
His grandson Jacob didn't know about this.
Jacob made a deceit. He received
his father's blessing by deception.
His brother wants to kill him, and
he flees from him to his uncle Laban
and he needs to spend the night somewhere.
Genesis 28:10-19
Jacob is fleeing.
"Jacob left Beersheba
and set out for Harran.
When he reached a certain place, he stopped
for the night because the sun had set.
Taking one of the stones there, he put
it under his head and lay down to sleep.
He had a dream in which he saw a
stairway resting on the earth, with its top
reaching to heaven, and the angels
of God were ascending and descending on it.
There above it stood the Lord"
- Listen what the Lord said to him.
"I am the Lord, the God of your father
Abraham and the God of Isaac.
I will give you and your descendants
the land on which you are lying.
God appeared to him
exactly there for a reason.
That is where his grandfather came and
invoked the name of God in that space.
Many testimonies I've heard from you,
whom I know and whom I spiritually follow,
that God has granted special graces
to you in these places where your ancestors
invoked the Name of God, where they
suffered for Him, some even shed blood.
And how many of these places are neglected?
He says:
"I will give you and your descendants
the land on which you are lying.
Your descendants will be like the dust of the earth,
and you will spread out to the west and to the east,
to the north and to the south. All peoples on earth
will be blessed through you and your offspring.
I am with you and will watch
over you wherever you go
I will bring you back to this land.
I will not leave you until I have
done what I have promised you."
When Jacob awoke from sleep, he thought: "Surely
the Lord is in this place, and I was not aware of it."
He was afraid and said,
"How awesome is this place!
This is the house of
God, the gate of heaven."
Then, in the text, we see that
it is precisely that city of Bethel.
"Early the next morning Jacob took the
stone he had placed under his head.
Set it up as a pillar
and poured oil on top of it.
He called that place Bethel, though
the city used to be called Luz.
God appears to him exactly in that place,
those were special places of grace for them.
I could give you examples from the
books of Genesis and Exodus until midnight
but I'll spare both you and myself.
There are many examples in the Psalms too.
We see how much their homeland meant to
the chosen people of Israel very precisely.
Now we enter the New Testament,
and there are two streams.
One of them wants to emphasize that it is
God's kingdom now, that we are all one now
that the Church is actually that new
nation, and that this is not so important.
What do you think?
Jesus, who is our God and the main figure of
the New Testament, was He a patriot or not?
Was Jesus a nationalist?
Let's translate it, if Croatia and Israel
are playing, who would Jesus support?
The Lord showed me two images when I was
praying about finding that healthy balance.
Let's see what attitude Jesus
had toward His homeland.
Luke 19:41-43
As he approached Jerusalem and saw
the city, he wept over it and said:
"If you, even you, had only known on
this day what would bring you peace-
but now it is hidden from your eyes.
The days will come upon you when your
enemies will build an embankment against you
and encircle you and
hem you in on every side."
I don't have to tell you what
Jerusalem means for the Jew.
And we see Jesus coming, looking
at His city, and weeping over it.
As God, He knows what will happen
and knows the cause that it's now hidden
that God put a veil over the eyes of the people
of Israel so that they would not recognize Him
so that the Gentiles could enter. As
God, He knows that, but He weeps.
When I prayed about this in adoration
it was like the Lord asked me
provocatively: Where else did I cry?
There are two places in the Gospel where
Jesus wept. You probably know the other one.
Lazarus' tomb.
There is one very important detail.
It is the key to bringing our healthy attitude.
Lazarus died, and Jesus was told about it.
He was then on a mission with His apostles.
John 11: 11-15
"Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep;
but I am going there to wake him up.”
His disciples replied:
“Lord, if he sleeps, he will get better.”
Jesus had been speaking of his death, but
his disciples thought he meant natural sleep.
Then He told them plainly:
“Lazarus is dead, and for your sake I am glad
I was not there, so that you may believe.”
Jesus, as God, knows
He will resurrect Lazarus.
He knows He will do it.
This happens earlier chronologically.
He tells the disciples this before
even reaching Lazarus' house.
Jesus approaches Lazarus' house.
The processions meet Him, Lazarus's
sisters, Mary and Martha, come, weeping
and now we see the last part,
which is important to draw a conclusion.
"When Mary reached the place where Jesus was
and saw Him, she fell at His feet and said:
'Lord, if you had been here,
my brother would not have died.'
When Jesus saw her and the Jews weeping,
He was deeply moved in spirit and troubled.
'Where have you laid him?' he asked.
'Come and see,' they replied.
Jesus wept.
Then the Jews said:
"See how he loved him."
Jesus is the only one who was in himself,
entirely God and entirely man.
We see that even in those situations when
He, as God, knows why the people of Jerusalem
can't recognize his coming and knows that
He will raise Lazarus, He as a man weeps.
From this, we can see that Jesus, in his human
dimension, was indeed a passionate patriot
who knew how to love his people.
We see that the New Testament provides a
biblical basis for the healthy patriotism.
Let's move on, not just focusing
on Jesus because he is still God and man
Let's see further through the apostles. E.g.
I deliberately chose provocative St. Paul
Many call him the initiator of globalization
Galatians 3:28
He says there is no longer Jew or Greek.
All that is irrelevant.
We are all one.
Even in that line, he says
there is no longer a male or female.
So they say Paul was
LGBT-friendly. Yeah, right.
Philippians 3:20
But our citizenship is in heaven.
And we eagerly await a Savior
from there, the Lord Jesus Christ.
From these lines, we can see Paul
as a man who is already above.
However, do not read the Bible
as Satan quotes it to Jesus.
Do not, like fundamentalists, extract
one line and ignore all other contexts.
Let's see what Paul was like in general.
Undoubtedly, the focus of our
actions should be on the heavens.
Romans 9:1-5
Consider Paul wrote the Epistle
to the Romans as an old man.
even though it is the first Epistle in the
Holy Scriptures attributed to St Paul
he wrote it last while
awaiting martyrdom.
You know that Paul
died in Rome, that he was martyred.
He said: "I speak the truth
in Christ, I am not lying
my conscience confirms it
through the Holy Spirit.
When you see a sentence
like this in Paul's texts
you know that the following is very offensive,
but he wants to emphasize that it is indeed so.
That is why he first said:
"I speak the truth, I am not lying.
I speak the truth in Christ"
This is not his truth.
My conscience is my co-witness.
But not my, which may be wrongly formed,
but my conscience in the Holy Spirit.
"I have great sorrow and
unceasing anguish in my heart"
Paul continuously suffered because of this
"For I could wish that I myself
were cursed and cut off from Christ
for the sake of my people,
those of my own race."
Imagine when Paul, who knows very well
what it means to be separated from Christ
It's not like when the BBB sings
"and to heaven with him and to hell"
and have no idea what heaven or hell is
St Paul knew very well
He says he isn't lying and that his
conscience in the Holy Spirit is his witness
"I would agree to be accursed, for eternity,
if only my countrymen according to the flesh
Israelites, Jews, had converted and
recognized what was for their salvation.
"Theirs is the adoption to sonship, the divine glory, the covenants,
the receiving of the law, the temple worship and the promises.
Theirs are the patriarchs, and from them is traced the human
ancestry of the Messiah, who is God over all, forever praised! Amen."
We see how passionate
Paul was as a patriot.
Be cautious with the things
being served to you now
unfortunately, often even
in religious education.
Take a healthy biblical standpoint.
I could go on,
but time isn't on our side.
We've seen numerous examples
in the New Testament.
We also have examples among saints. Look at
this quote from Blessed Alojzije Stepinac.
"In love for the Croatian people, I will not
allow myself to be overshadowed by anyone."
Throughout the history of the Church this
attitude was regularly cultivated by the saints.
So, it is healthy.
Also, Blessed Alojzije Stepinac
when it was necessary to
confront the Ustasha regime
precisely because it was killing
other people due to nationalism
that same Stepinac was the only
one who had the courage to do it.
This is a wonderful sermon
on the Feast of Christ the King.
Try to find it on the
Internet and read it all.
You should had the guts to say
this in 1942 in Zagreb Cathedral.
It's a brilliant text; try to find
it online; you have the whole text.
He speaks about that
national diversity and says:
That diversity must not be
a source of mutual destruction.
Because the third thing we claim is that every
nation and race, as they are formed on earth today
have the right to a life and a
treatment worthy of a human being.
All of them, regardless of whether they
belong to the Gypsy race or any other,
whether they are black or classy Europeans,
whether they are hated Jews or proud Aryans,
have the same right to say
Our Father who is in heaven.
If God has granted this right to everyone,
what human authority can deny it?
All nations, have an equal obligation
to beat their chests and say,
forgive us our debts
as we forgive our debtors.
That's why the Catholic Church
has always and still condemns every
injustice and violence committed in the
name of class, race, or ethnic theories.
Intelligence can't be eradicated because
it pleases the working class,
as taught by Bolshevism.
Gypsies or Jews cannot be eradicated
because they are considered an inferior race.
Back then, the term gypsies was used, so don't
think I'm offending the Roma national minority
I'm reading how Stepinac spoke then.
He concludes: " If the principles of racial
theories that have no basis are applied lightly,
is there even any security left
on earth for any nation?"
You can imagine that Pavelić didn't
particularly like Stepinac after this.
However, his charisma was too strong to
remove him. This is our role model.
Pope John Paul II says:" The brightest
figure of the Croatian church
whom we should follow
in very challenging times."
The times ahead are very challenging,
but it's not the first time for us.
We often like to proclaim that our times are
harder than before, but I'm not quite sure.
It has always been demanding for those who
were God's; the world was always against them.
But they have triumphed in it.
That's why a healthy attitude is:
our direction is Heaven,
the heavenly homeland.
That is our goal, and the path is this
earthly homeland. We can't exclude either.
St Paul gives us a brilliant
distinction in the 1 Corinthians
so that we know what must come
first and then what comes next.
We are born in this earthly homeland.
We dream and fight for the one above.
But, as I said, this is the goal, and this is
the path, and they do not exclude each other.
1 Corinthians 15:42-49
"So will it be with the resurrection of the dead. The body
that is sown is perishable, it is raised imperishable
it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory;
it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power
it is sown a natural body,
it is raised a spiritual body.
If there is a natural body,
there is also a spiritual body.
So it is written: “The first man
Adam became a living being;
the last Adam, a life-giving spirit."
The spiritual did not come first, but
the natural, and after that the spiritual.
That is the attitude we should nurture.
This is my observation,
and I found confirmation
from one of the most influential
doctors of the 20th century
the author of that individual
approach in psychoanalysis
and he also related physical illnesses with
specific psychological and spiritual states.
Today, it's something normal, and we
know it as a psychosomatic disorder
Paul Tournier, I don't know
if you've heard of him.
A great thinker and one of the most
influential doctors of the twentieth century.
He brings an interesting thesis that
these two extremes can only be avoided,
this is a man who has experience
from all faiths, nations, religions
and patients all over the world
he says that these two
extremes can only be reconciled
in individuals who live
an authentic Christian faith.
I will quote him.
It will sound even more powerful.
He describes these two poles that
constantly put humanity in conflict.
"It is a common experience for humanity to oscillate
between two poles: simplicity and complexity."
People whose minds are such that they see only one
side of something tend to take decisive action.
They succeed in everything they
do because they don't hairsplitting
and have abundant trust
in their own abilities.
While individuals with
refined and cultivated minds
tend to get lost in the
maze of subtle distinctions.
They always see how complicated things really are,
so their powers of persuasion are negligible.
Have you ever wondered why
people who are so raw, often primitive
always rise to leadership positions?
I have nothing against those
people, but uneducated people
emerge and learn to
manage just because of this.
And some who sound so admirable,
you could listen to them for hours
but let them something
to manage, they fail.
He continues: "That's why the world
is led by those least suited
to raise its cultural and moral standards.
Only a few manage to combine both
tendencies. He says that is extremely rare.
By my understanding, to fulfill this wonder, the
best prerequisite is a living Christian faith
because it provides both deep
understanding and simplicity of heart.
That's why I appeal to you:
You must be elite who will bring
healthy balance - that Stepinac brought.
I won't let myself be
overshadowed in love for Croatia,
but I will never allow
trampling others’ rights
Only someone who authentically
lived his Christianity
could bring such a healthy attitude that
we can still be proud of today.
That's why you have a great
responsibility. You are a lighthouse.
People around you are falling
into one of these two extremes.
Without offending them.
We would also be like that without the Holy
Spirit, but our responsibility is bigger.
We are entering another very tricky area
How to nurture healthy and biblically
oriented patriotism and live it
The Pope gives us the answer again.
We need to nurture collective,
familial, and national memory.
I will advertise another excellent
book by Pope Francis - "On Education"
in which he discusses the
issue of educating young people
to have a healthy
attitude toward patriotism.
He says: We cannot educate if we
separate ourselves from memory.
Therefore, let us ask for the grace to renew
memories-memories of our personal journey
how the Lord sought us
memories of my religious family, our educational
communities, and memories as a nation.
Looking back is an awakening to
receive God's word even more strongly.
You know, the Israelites, Jews, when they
go into battle, what do they say first?
O YHWH, who saved our forefather Abraham,
who led Moses, who parted the Red Sea
they recount these God's
victories, and then they win
knowing it’s the same
God who did all of that
Memory is active, not passive.
In the Hebrew way of thinking,
remembrance always prompts action.
In some translations, "YHWH will remember us"
is translated as "YHWH will intercede for us"
Literally, it is a synonym.
So we see that it is active,
something that we need to nurture.
Pope continues: "Nations have
memories as well as individuals."
"Humanity also has a collective memory."
Remember those earlier days
after you had received the light,
when you endured in a great
conflict full of suffering. Hebrews 10:32
Remember your leaders, who
spoke the word of God to you.
Consider the outcome of their way of
life and imitate their faith. Hebrews 13:7
Why? This is very important now, to
remain united and to know how to resist
the wave of globalization that is coming
and wants to denationalize nations.
(Pope Francis: "On Education")
"Memory has the power of unification and integration."
"While intellect left to itself
pushes a person into the abyss,
memory becomes the living
nucleus of a family or nation."
"A family without memory
does not deserve to be called so."
"A family that doesn't respect and take care of
its elders, who are its living memory, is a broken family."
"But a family and a nation that remember
are a family and a nation with a future."
Pope appeals, especially to people
working in the educational system.
"Let's not allow the elites,
separated from reality,
to try to diminish or
undermine this living memory."
"On the contrary, let us turn to those
precious, moral, and religious sources
of the faithful people of God
to nourish and heal our institutions.
This is very, very important. And our
memory is being taken away from us.
E.g. the Homeland War, which is
the basis of the creation of our state
is discussed in the fourth grade,
when the national exams are held.
I haven't heard a single hour about it,
nor the young people I'm talking
to now know nothing about it.
That was recent
someone was shedding blood or dying,
but generations are being raised
who don't care about that.
And it will be retaliation for them. That's
why the key is in nurturing that memory.
Look how many times in the Old Testament
God encourages the people with this verb.
I'll give you just a few examples.
Deuteronomy 8: 2-6.
"Remember how the Lord
led you in the wilderness,
to humble and test you in order
to know what was in your heart.
Deuteronomy 4:9.
"Be careful and watch yourselves closely so that you do
not forget the things your eyes have seen or let them
fade from your heart as long as you live.
Teach them to your children
and to their children after them."
What's the problem?
The problem is that when we lose memory,
we necessarily begin to rely on idols.
And this is happening to our nation.
If you don't have the memory you nurtured, you
will necessarily need something to hold onto.
That's what the Pope says:
"Whoever has no memory relies on idols."
Deut 28:47.
"Because you didn't serve the Lord joyfully
and gladly in the time of prosperity,
therefore you will serve the enemies."
Deut 4:25-31.
When the blessings come,
and everything goes well,
whether we admit it to ourselves
or not, we live in that time.
No matter how much we like
to say that it's hard for us,
look a few generations
back at how they lived,
what they ate and wore,
how mobile they were.
Then this temptation happens.
"After you have had children and grandchildren
and have lived in the land a long time
if you then become corrupt
and make any kind of idol,
doing evil in the eyes of the Lord
your God and arousing his anger
I call the heavens and the
earth as witnesses against you
that you will quickly perish from the land
that you are crossing the Jordan to possess.
You will not live there long
but will certainly be destroyed.
The Lord will scatter you among the peoples
and only a few of you will survive among
the nations to which the Lord will drive you.
There you will worship
man-made gods of wood and stone
which cannot see or hear or eat or smell."
This is exactly what happened
to our nation. Things started well for us.
We entered the European Union, great.
And 400,000 people left.
My people, are you aware that
without God's miracle, that's irreversible?
And there, where they are,
without naming anyone, across the border,
they will worship gods made by human
hands, gods of tin, and gods of paper.
It's terrible.
I don't want to call anyone out ad hominem
here. I know someone had good reasons
but I want to shed some biblical light
on how God sees this phenomenon.
Someone was dying and bleeding, and
someone else sold it and left so easily
bought a car with that money, wrecked it.
Now he is in debt and has nothing of his own.
Isn't that a curse?
Come on, you tell me,
maybe I'm a bit delusional about this.
How would you call it?
What does the Holy Scripture say?
If we do not preserve the memory
we will start worshiping idols,
whether we admit it to ourselves or not.
Marino Restrepo, my good friend,
when he started his ministry,
he prayed for the strongest
protection when he went to Africa.
Everyone told him that there were all kinds of
witchcrafs and voodoo targeted at preachers.
You know what he realized? Those sorceresses
aren't that dangerous at all; they don't know.
When they see who Christ
is, they hand over their
charms, amulets, and
talismans and ask to be baptized.
He says, now, after 40 years of experience
"I pray most strongly when I go to
Western Europe and North America.
Because the spirit of materialism most
effectively prevents the spread of the Word"
Be cautious and take this very seriously.
Talk to your family
about your family history
visit the places you come from.
Renew if you can.
Preserve the memory of it.
We must be grateful to those who
made it possible for us to be alive today.
Ante Čaljkušić said it brilliantly.
When a woman aborts, she hasn't
just aborted that child,
but maybe 1,000 offspring
that would be born later from that child.
And you are here, a miracle of God. Why?
Because your ancestors gave you life and God.
Now we're entering the third area
I'm in timing.
3. Why and how to pray for the ancestors?
Why don't people preserve memory?
We have to understand that memory is
very difficult, whether national or familial.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina are many parishes
in exile,and it's hard to even mentally go back.
I would dare say that without
the Holy Spirit, it's impossible.
Just look at the names Catholics gave. I've
traveled it up and down all the dirt roads.
Čemerno, Zla vlast, Zlopolje. Išćelišće.
Odselišće, meaning sorrow, harm, and exodus.
Why? Well, history was like that.
How to love Čemerno (Sorrowfully)
The history was brutal. Or people who
come and talk about their family history,
which is so difficult due to
property, infidelities, and divorces.
They can't stand their parents.
They forgive because the Bible says so,
but it's not even close to their hearts.
We see that there is a need for prayer
for reconciliation with our ancestors
and with our homeland,
the place we come from.
I won't discuss this second part because you
have the theme of memory and reconciliation.
We've talked a lot about it, but first
part is especially relevant today.
In November, we pray for the deceased,
and then you have those discussions.
Does the sin of our
ancestors impact us or not?
You'll hear from various pulpits:
No, baptism erases everything.
Others say: Yes, we pray for the purification of
the family tree and some strange terminologies.
We have to find that healthy balance.
Do you think we engage in
this because it's fun for us?
It's because people
come out of genuine need.
You can wait for the Church to develop a very
clear set of rules and then enter into this.
I respect people who see it that way.
But what would happen if we approached
all mystical phenomena like that?
Some people don't want to go to Medjugorje
until the Church officially recognizes it.
Today, it's a shrine
I respect that, and I'm not criticizing.
Thank God.
However, imagine that everyone
looked at it that way.
There have been officially
2,000 spiritual vocations from Medjugorje.
They received a spiritual
vocation in Medjugorje.
While based on the letters that
Franciscans received, there are 7,000 of them.
Priests, who are very active
in spiritual renewals and confessions
say that every other conversion
is related to Medjugorje.
We can wait or, respect
what the Church also respects,
the sensus fidei, the
feeling among the people.
Why, even before Stepinac was beatified,
his grave was visited all day by the people?
Because he attracts.
The same here; we can wait,
listen, and be very cautious
but there are concrete problems.
People whom I spiritually
guide were healed from
incurable diseases when they
prayed correctly for their ancestors.
Let's dive into doctrine a bit;
what does doctrine say?
The Catechism of
the Catholic Church, point 404.
Original sin, which is
sin in an analogous way.
It is not something we have done directly
but sin in an analogous way.
It says this about original sin.
It is a sin which will be transmitted
by propagation to all mankind,
by the transmission of a human nature
deprived of original holiness and justice.
That is why original sin is called
"sin" only in an analogical sense:
it is a sin "contracted" and
not "committed" - a state and not an act.
If we are affected by the sin
of our first parents, Adam and Eve
do you really think that you will not be
affected by the sins of your parents?
Therein lies the problem with those
who say that baptism erases everything
as if baptism is a magical act,
bioenergy, hocus pocus.
It is true that after baptism,
we no longer have moral guilt.
But baptism is a covenant like any sacrament.
Those of us who are married, you all know.
Since marriage is also a covenant
does that mean that the moment you get
married, all the problems disappear?
Do you live happily ever after?
Not quite.
Because every covenant
has to be fought for
you have to die to
yourself for that covenant.
The Catechism of the Catholic Church
also confirms this.
Point 1263
By Baptism all sins are forgiven,
original sin and all personal sins,
as well as all punishment for sin.
In those who have been reborn nothing remains that
would impede their entry into the Kingdom of God
neither Adam's sin, nor personal
sin, nor the consequences of sin,
the gravest of which
is separation from God.
And here most of them stop, but it's the same
as the temptation of Jesus in the desert.
The devil says it's written, throw yourself
down, but Jesus says: Yes, but it's also written
in Catholicism 1264
Yet certain temporal consequences of sin remain
in the baptized, such as suffering, illness, death
and such frailties inherent in life as weaknesses
of character, as well as an inclination to sin
that Tradition calls concupiscence, or
metaphorically, "the tinder for sin" (fomes peccati)
since concupiscence
"is left for us to wrestle with
it cannot harm those who do not consent but
manfully resist it by the grace of Jesus Christ."
So, it calls us to fight for it, and
that's why it's quite justified to pray
for the reparation for
the sins of our ancestors.
Because then they will experience grace.
They can no longer change what they did,
but we can deliver them from the
place of torment with our prayers.
It will also be a great
blessing for our lives.
This is very biblically based. I'll skim
through the Old and New Testament a bit.
Exodus 34:6. “The Lord, the
compassionate and gracious God,
slow to anger, abounding
in love and faithfulness,
maintaining love to thousands, and
forgiving wickedness, rebellion and sin.
Yet he does not leave the guilty unpunished
he punishes the children and their children
for the sin of the parents to
the third and fourth generation.”
Lamentations 5:7. Our ancestors sinned and
are no more, and we bear their punishment.
Now, we come to the most
controversial text, Ezekiel.
Those who advocate the thesis that there is
no sin of the ancestors, that it is nonsense.
So that it's not just me lecturing
Ezekiel 18.
The word of the Lord came to me:
"What do you people mean
by quoting this proverb:
" The parents eat sour grapes, and
the children's teeth are set on edge'? "
As surely as I live, declares the Sovereign Lord,
you will no longer quote this proverb in Israel.
For everyone belongs to me, the parent as
well as the child—both alike belong to me.
The one who sins is the one who will die.
So it says this will not be said anymore.
But Ezekiel clearly shows
when it won't, it says:
But suppose this son has a son who
sees all the sins his father commits
and though he sees them,
he does not do such things:
He does not eat at the mountain
shrines or look to the idols of Israel.
Does not defile his neighbor's wife. He does
not oppress anyone or require a pledge for a loan.
This describes a holy life!
so if you start living a holy life, then
the spiritual law will not continue
That's the point.
He does not commit robbery but gives his food to
the hungry and provides clothing for the naked.
He withholds his hand from mistreating the poor and takes no
profit from them. He keeps my laws and follows my decrees.
So we see, this is a holy life
he strives for, asceticism.
We must find a healthy balance here.
Some people blame
everything on their ancestors,
and I know that person has
no discipline of asceticism,
doesn't get up, doesn't pray.
And that's a deviation
we shouldn't look at it that way.
In my opinion, we should enter this space
only after we have dealt with our weaknesses
and gained some discipline
in our spiritual life.
And then it comes into play.
In my experience working with young people
When you really make an effort,
cast aside your addictions and vices,
and have a discipline of prayer
yet in some areas, you still feel
such oppression and bondage
then it's most often
connected precisely with this.
How do I know?
When we started praying for plenary
indulgences, the Church granted many of them.
Study the Church's
documents on indulgences.
Every day you can deliver one
of your ancestors from purgatory.
Just half an hour of adoration.
Half an hour of examining
the Holy Scripture.
Now, my wife would tell me to cut it short.
Every single day, we can deliver our
ancestors from purgatory, every day.
Start studying and using that.
My friend, Rajko Bundalo, talked about
how God revealed a very
effective model to him.
Make a table, including father, mother
grandmothers/fathers, great-grandmothers/fathers,
and great-great-grandmothers/fathers.
And pray for a plenary indulgence
for each of those souls.
Pray. What does it
cost you to offer a Mass?
From the very beginning,
we Catholics pray for our deceased.
Pay attention to 1 Corinthians 15:29.
They say this is an Old Testament attitude.
"Now if there is no resurrection, what will
those do who are baptized for the dead?
If the dead are not raised at all,
why are people baptized for them?"
In the early Church, it was customary for people to
be baptized on behalf of their deceased relatives
who did not have the grace to hear
about Christ. Paul praises that attitude.
We don't have that today, and we can see how
much they held on to it. It's the New Testament.
Jesus says: "Don't think that I have come to abolish
the Law or the Prophets; I have come to fulfill them."
When he argues with the Pharisees
He says: "So you testify against yourselves that you
are the descendants of those who murdered the prophets.
Go ahead, then, and complete
what your ancestors started!"
Therefore, we see that it's both
a Catholic and a biblical standpoint.
But don't go to extremes. Your ancestors are
not to blame for everything. You must live holy.
On the other hand, do not fail to pray
for them; you will receive many graces.
Because certain sins are
repeated through families.
The best example is David.
While David lived righteously,
his entire family was under protection.
Then David falls into sin; let's see
the analogy. This is important.
How did David fall into sin?
Firstly, it was arrogance.
He didn't go to war, he had fought a lot
and now he's enjoying his conquests.
Then he wanders on the terrace;
he needs to pass the time somehow.
He sees a woman. Fornication: that woman is
another man's wife, his close friend's woman.
He sins with her.
And then he kills her
husband to cover up his sin.
Do you know what happened
to David's family afterward?
Just after Solomon was born.
He had an older son, Amnon
Amnon started feeling a sick
attraction towards his sister
again fornication, incest,
a forbidden relationship
to the point he almost got sick from
it and slept with his sister Tamar.
Absalom found out and killed him.
Forbidden relationships,
fornication, murder.
Why? Because those spirits were released.
Nathan the prophet prophesied it.
That's why, with our holy life,
but also with our falls
we allow either the devil or
blessing to enter our family.
That's why prayer is very important.
In the spiritual world, it's very fluid.
I know this might bother someone
because they can't fit it into their puzzle
What Hebrews 7:9 says
Levi, who collects
the tenth, paid the tenth through Abraham
In Abraham, who is Levi's great-grandfather
because when Melchizedek met Abraham,
Levi was still in the body of his ancestor.
So, he gives justification.
How strong the Jews had that
communication that is stereotyped today
They have the justification
for the tithe to Levi in the fact
that the great-grandfather
Abraham met Melchizedek.
That's the Hebrew way of thinking.
Again, I don't have time to
delve deeper into this
but maybe take this model
that Rajko Bundalo mentioned,
the model of presenting
masses, praying rosaries,
especially if you have
oppression in some area.
It's like having two rooms
one room has no one at the door
while in the other room, 100 people are leaning
against the door, which is immense pressure.
One had a holy lineage, while the other
had fornicator and alcoholic ancestors
And what happens? He is still
protected by his baptism, right?
The doors are closed, but when he
falls, when he unlocks the doors
This one who had a holy
lineage easily gets out of it.
While other due to that "fome specati",
those seeds of desire within him
has a stronger urge towards the same sin,
e.g. alcohol, lust,
and when he falls, all those come.
So don't neglect this practice.
Just let it be in the teachings of the Church,
biblical, and under spiritual guidance.
Don't do it without a spiritual
leader, someone who can advise you.
Now we've addressed these three points
regarding our dealing with
the past and our positioning.
The fourth point that is controversial and
still causing significant problems today is
Are there messianic nations today?
What does it mean when
a nation considers itself chosen?
There are significant misconceptions.
If you've been following a bit, the
war between Russia and Ukraine.
I will explain why this type of delusion
is much more prevalent in Orthodoxy.
You have a radical right stream
of academics in Serbia
who talk about the cosmic nation,
about the Serbs heaven
that's what happens
when you cross the line.
I'm not saying that our
nation hasn't crossed the line
and I don't want to wash our hands of that.
That's why it's important
not to be confused.
I had a lot of questions about this, because
people hear those prophecies for Croatia.
We all feel like God is
doing something with us.
How can we find a healthy middle ground?
God is the father of all nations;
that's the first truth.
Pope Francis speaks a lot about it.
I recommend his book Fratelli Tutti.
Encyclical, Fratelli Tutti, has just come out.
It's analyzing that universal brotherhood.
We deal a lot with that topic in Bosnia.
However, God has often chosen
a particular nation in history.
He chose it for a specific mission
in a very concrete historical context.
How will you recognize whether it's
about the heresy of a messianic nation
or God is choosing a nation to
convey a certain truth? By fruits.
When it's about heresy of a messianic
nation they puts themselves above others
the fruits are war, killing,
conquest, and significant problems.
But when God chooses a nation to
bless the rest of the world through it,
that is then God's choice.
In a particular historical moment.
Why are our Orthodox brothers prone
to create these messianic nations?
I've seen that;
it's a big problem.
I've traveled to Serbia very often. My
friends are Orthodox priests and theologians
and one of the main issues is that we don't
understand why they look at us like that.
To understand Orthodoxy, we must
understand autocephaly.
I'll explain it briefly.
When you had the Western and Eastern
Roman Empires, Christianity came in.
Constantine recognized it, and Theodosius
declared it the official religion in 410.
At that moment, the Western Roman Empire was
in political decline, and decadence set in.
The Pope became stronger authority than the
emperor, and the West began to nurture that.
The Pope was the one who could reconcile
Charlemagne, Louis XIV, and various others.
That is why democracy was born in the West.
Because the Pope was the one who
could stop authorities
We must not blame our brothers from
the East; that is the historical context.
At the same time, in the
East, the empire grew
Constantinople became stronger than Rome.
The emperor is more
important than the patriarch
the emperor even dictates
what the patriarch should do.
They justify it biblically, calling the
political leader 'Basileus,' the anointed one
and justifying it with David and Solomon,
who were anointed for that service.
There's no time to go further, but Orthodox
countries continued to develop this way.
Each country had its own church.
but here in the West, Stepinac gave his life
so that the Church in Croatia, Yugoslavia
stay together with the Vatican.
It's natural that these are
two opposing worlds.
I could hold an entire lecture on this,
but I would like you to know this.
What does it mean if God chooses a nation?
I have given you very interesting historical
examples, for instance, the Armenians.
The people who first accepted Christianity
as the official religion in 301.
Btw, the apostles Bartholomew and
Jude Thaddeus were martyred there,
and the Armenians have been faithful
to Christ and the Pope from the beginning.
That nation suffered so much
it has the largest diaspora, even
larger than Croatia and Ireland.
"The Happiest People on Earth"
I recommend you to read that book
When the charismatic renewal came very early
to Armenia, since they were very spiritual,
and they easily embraced
the baptism in the Spirit
that came through Russian Pentecostals.
And then God gave, this is a true
story, a revelation to a prophet.
He tells him that
great evil will happen
that they will die, although he was illiterate,
after hours of prayer and fasting
that prophecy is kept in a vault in a bank
because it hasn't been fully fulfilled
and shows him that they should emigrate
to a country he drew, that is the USA
and that they will become a great blessing
for that nation and the whole world.
Of course, as it happens
with prophecies, most declared him insane.
The people in those communities who
listened to the prophecies fled to California.
Immediately after that, 1.5 million
Armenians were killed by the Turks
1,500,000, the biggest
genocide in the 20th century.
We see how Satan was
furious with that nation precisely
because of its election
and the mission it had.
The whole phenomenon of Azusa Street,
the spiritual awakening in USA
started through Armenian
communities in California.
Demos Shakarian, the prophet,
was honored by Pope Paul VI
for his positive influence on
millions of Catholics.
God chose them for
that purpose.
Let's talk about Israel.
We know that according to Church doctrine,
before the judgment day, among other things
the conversion of the Jews and their
return to the homeland must happen
In 1947, after 2000 years, the
Israelites returned from over 100 countries
and re-established the land
God showed Abraham.
Is that not supernatural?
Is that possible?
Well, it's not.
What happens just before that? In 1947,
the state of Israel was established.
Before that, the Holocaust, again genocide,
the devil wanted to eradicate them.
Let's move on. Portugal
I have many examples,
but I won't take long.
Portugal was given a sign in the 20th
century, the apparitions in Fatima.
Amidst World War I, the Virgin
Mary appears to three illiterate children
and tells them that if the world
does not convert, an even worse war will occur
The Red Dragon from Russia,
communism, will engulf Europe
priests and believers will suffer, and the
bishop in white, will fall from a bullet.
All three things happened, although this
was spoken in 1917., except in Portugal.
God showed how much power there
is if we listen to what Our Lady tells us.
Our Lady asked for the
consecration to her heart.
On the Feast days of Our Lady of Fatima,
May 13 in 1931 and 1936, the bishops,
at the prompting of Lucia from Fatima, consecrated
Portugal to the Immaculate Heart of Mary.
February 6, 1939, Lucia wrote
to the Bishop of Lisbon, Da Silva
exactly six months before
the start of World War II.
Portugal will be spared from the war that
will soon be initiated by Hitler's Germany
solely because of the consecration
to the Immaculate Heart of Mary.
The letter is preserved, archived,
precisely six months before.
What if we listen to
what God is telling us?
That's why we speak about it here today.
Because the choosing of Portugal
continued with the Church in Croatia
Our Lady in Medjugorje said on August 25,
1991, to the visionary Marija Pavlovic Lunetti:
What I began in Fatima, I will finish
in Medjugorje; my heart will triumph.
We are chosen that through us
the light may come to Europe,
not to elevate ourselves above others.
The message of Medjugorje
has encircled the whole world.
Go to Youth Festival,
experience all that rised flags.
And we behave nonchalantly about it.
I will show you how much disobedience
to God's promptings has cost us.
How costly!
Our Lady appeared in Medjugorje in
1981, saying, I am the Queen of Peace.
A year later, in 1982, she appeared
in Kibeho, Rwanda
and asked for a prayer for peace.
You know how they mocked
Yugoslavia was then, brotherhood and unity,
united nations, what a war, what a queen of peace.
Ten years after the bloodiest war in Europe since
World War II broke out in Bosnia and Herzegovina
100 thousand people lost their lives.
In 1994, in Africa, precisely in Rwanda
the biggest genocide since
World War II occurred
a 1.5 million people died in
the conflict between two tribes in Rwanda.
The only two genocides after World War
II are Bosnia and Herzegovina and Rwanda.
Has the Lady given enough time?
Well, yes, ten years.
Did people listen?
They didn't.
What is comforting is that
the message of Medjugorje has not ended.
The apparitions continued.
But we won't just stay
with the apparitions.
I would like that you see that divine
choosing God gave to our nation.
You are responsible for the same.
Confirmations came from various sides.
I will specifically highlight the message
that Our Lady gave to Don Stefano Gobbi.
a priest who has had locutions, inner speeches
from the Blessed Virgin Mary, his whole life.
He came to Croatia in 1996,
right after the war
and in the presence of Cardinal Franjo
Kuharić, he received a locution from Our Lady.
There was a praying gathering
at Jordanovac with the people.
Pay attention to what Our Lady says about
our nation and the war we went through:
How pleased I'm with the cenacle you had here
with the priests and faithful of my movement
presided over by the cardinal,
the archbishop I greatly love and protect.
We see the choosing
of a nation and a people
"Upon this nation my enemy became furious,
bringing into it a severe trial of violence and war.
How much suffering
my children had to endure
I interceded to give them
the great gift of liberation and peace."
Do you remember all those rosaries
that were prayed and worn around the neck?
I interceded to give them the
great gift of liberation and peace
but
this is the harder part now;
"now, even greater torments await you."
That's what's happening to us now.
Because the spiritual persecution what
is happening to us will be much harder
because it is more insidious
and drags souls away more easily.
"From now on, even greater torments
are expected, but do not fear, little flock
it pleased the Heavenly Father to give
you the kingdom of my Immaculate Heart."
Fear not, little flock
Your heavenly mother has granted you
the gift to gather from all sides
into her victorious army
Here, we see indications of this return,
with which I will conclude.
She continues.
The hour of decisive battle has come.
Satan has already reached the peak of
his power, and now, even within the Church,
he will complete his work as much as the Lord
allowed him for its most painful cleansing."
And that's what we see in the churches now
in the West, those altars in rainbow colors
that's that painful cleansing,
Satan in the Church.
"Moments you will live through are important
because all the events I prophesied will come true.
The time you will perfectly glorify Jesus has come.
You are the consolation of His abandonment.
You are the profound
joy of His divine heart.
Do not fear, little flock, be my little children
whom I have gathered around of the world
for the great battle between God and Satan,
between the forces of good and evil."
During the homeland war, St John Paul II
said it was a cosmic conflict between good and evil.
Furthermore, pay attention;
this sentence must fill you with awe.
"The Lord will triumph through me" and it is not
difficult for us to accept; we are a Marian people
"Through me, His little maid, but I, I will
triumph through you, my little children."
And that is your responsibility.
Your responsibility for a holy life,
for prayer, for listening to the Spirit.
"What happened in this nation,
becomes a sign for everyone.
Because of your faithfulness to Jesus, to your
heavenly Mother, to the Church, and to the Pope
Satan has attacked her in
an attempt to destroy her.
With this goal in mind, all satanic
and Masonic forces joined together.
However, I myself marked
the moment of their defeat."
And that is comforting
It will happen. They have joined forces.
Specifically, when we talk about Medjugorje,
about the Church in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We use the term the Church of the Croats.
Of all the amendments made at Dayton,
up to this ninth and final loose Schmidt's
all were against Croatian Catholics.
Can you believe this,
at the beginning of the 21st century
tanks of the international community
invasioned the Herzegovina Bank in Mostar
robbed that bank without any evidence, damaged
several thousands of depositors and companies
it was the backbone of the
Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
They have not returned it to this day.
Tanks robbed the bank,
trampled and spat on  the pictures
of Saint John Paul II that were there.
How will you explain and justify that?
But like with this sentence:
"all satanic and Masonic joined forces."
There are countless examples,
but we don't have time
I could tell you how many things have
happened just in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
People from other
denominations have also discussed this.
Pope Francis encourages
us to use good and healthy discernment
to listen what the Spirit is doing among
our Protestant and Orthodox brothers.
If we know our doctrine and faith
well, we can certainly learn from them.
Even though we have the fullness
of truth, many of us have neglected it
but we know that some of their communities
fervently fast, pray, listen, and seek God's word.
Do not be exclusive.
The Pope encourages, learn from them
through discernment retain what is good.
An American well-known
Protestant evangelist, Patricia King
spoke about the new prophetic
waves and conversions that are coming.
During the broadcast, even though
she has no idea about Croatia
She says:
"The word Croatia, comes to me."
"I feel that God is blessing
that country in a special way"
"He is breathing the Holy Spirit into it,
on everyone who is connected with it. "
And that this country will
become a light to Europe.
John Mulinde, a well-known
Ugandan Pentecostal pastor
Uganda strongly live ecumenism. There
is indeed brotherhood among denominations.
A man who had never heard of
Croatia, spends time in prayer and fasting
and God shows him Europe in dense darkness
and how light breaks through from
only one place, from Croatia.
He goes to Croatia and holds seminars, and
many Catholic priests have received him.
I feel that we need to invest in Croatia.
I have never been to Croatia.
Croatia has been calling
me for several years.
I met some Croats in Israel,
different people every year
and they all say:
"please come, help us."
People who have no
connections confirm this.
And because of that
we must be aware that each of us has a
responsibility in this spiritual awakening.
You also saw that
magnificent event on Maksimir
Who could gather
that if not the Holy Spirit?
When some newspapers, which are against us,
went to investigate who was behind this
is it the Kaptol?
but they see it's not the Kaptol
is it politics?
but they see no one is behind it.
When they had to admit that the Holy Spirit
gathered them; they stopped writing about it.
Fifty thousand people, so many
young, come to glorify God and pay for it.
Orban tried to do the same thing, even paid people
to come, but the stadium was still half empty.
Some of ours were there.
Why? Something is happening.
Find your place in it
That is very, very important.
God did not give it to us for ourselves
it must first become a blessing for
Europe and then a blessing for the world.
Now we come to the
last part, the tricky one
it's often said that we should not talk
about it, that it deepens the wounds.
I will speak in the name of God
based on what the Lord has shown me
You take what you like, what you feel
is yours, and what is not, do not take.
I have prepared a 5-minute video
to wake you up a little, be careful.
This is the position of Europe in 2007.
It is very interesting;
there are many animations.
It will wake you up a little more, and
then we will conclude with the fifth point.
To give you insight into what
is happening around us.
Are you shocked,
or did you somehow anticipate this?
Those who have lived abroad know.
Please do not think that I have something
against Muslims; it's not a problem at all.
In Bosnia, we have dialogues for peace;
the problem is that we are disappearing.
We, as Christians, cannot be indifferent
if we genuinely believe in our values.
I leave it to your intelligence to assess.
This was in 2007, before the Arab
Spring, and the migrant crisis in 2015.
Calculated with the previous immigration rate.
Try to imagine the situation today.
That means the world we are going
to leave to our grandchildren
even to our children,
may not look the same.
West, as we can see,
it is no longer possible to restore
and unfortunately, there is not
even that healthy core in the faith.
In some places, there are not even ten
righteous people from Sodom who would save it.
However, it is not all lost here yet
and what will be crucial will
involve the return of the diaspora.
That is how our nation can be saved,
I appeal to everyone to think about it.
How many of us live in
the diaspora, and how is life lived?
As patriots, we have seen the biblical basis
for that, and as those who cherish memory
who are connected with their homeland
and recognize what God is doing here.
I appeal to your conscience, think.
Think about it, pray.
I know many are drawn in their hearts,
but the mind does not allow it.
But now, even the mind shows,
so what are the costs of heating
what kind of hunger is this,
and what insecurity is this?
What ideology has penetrated
every pore of education?
Do I want that for my children?
The biggest lie I've heard
Or rather the two biggest lies
I hear when people leave
"I'm going for my children."
Why?
So they can indoctrinate your children with
monstrous ideologies from the earliest age?
And the second:
"I'm going to be a light there."
And they returns as ruins.
Many such examples I have had.
We must listen to who is leading us
and who is forcing us to go.
If it's God, if it's evangelistic,
great, thank God, be a light there.
There are such examples.
I'm not saying there aren't any,
but the vast majority are not like that.
In the Old Testament, exile never,
absolutely never happened
without being the result
of disobedience and curse.
In the New Testament, we have the
example of exile so that faith may spread
Again, we must find a middle ground
between these two extremes.
We should not talk that it's definitely a curse
and burden on the people who have gone there.
But also not say that we all
went there to be light
because we see that
there is not so much light.
So, it's a question
of how brightly we shine.
I put it on your heart to reflect on this.
Countless examples show that
whenever the Israelites fled in exile
it was due to disobedience and curse
except in Jeremiah 29:4-14.
When they went to Babylon
because of disobedience
but Jeremiah advised them to stay there
and those are the two texts
that God showed me.
I will convey what came to me in prayer
I encourage all who listen
to us from the diaspora to
enter their room and pray to see
what God is telling them.
The first text is Jeremiah 29:4-14.
The Israelites are in exile in Babylon,
and he writes them a circular letter.
This is the only time in the Old Testament
where he says: Stay, but for a while.
"This is what the Lord Almighty
says to all those I carried
into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon
“Build houses and settle down;
plant gardens and eat what they produce.
Marry and have sons and daughters;
Marry your sons and daughters,
so that they too may have sons and daughters.
Increase in number there;
do not decrease.
Seek the peace of the city
to which I have carried you into exile.
Pray for it, because if it prospers,
you too will prosper.”
This is what the Lord says:
"When seventy years
are completed for Babylon
I will come to you and fulfill my good
promise to bring you back to this place.
For I know the plans I have for you.
Plans to prosper you and not to harm you,
plans to give you hope and a future."
What is this all about?
That is the text that the
Lord put on my heart for this time.
Jeremiah tells them to stay,
and that's what happened to our people.
Be fruitful and become
many, prosper, learn
but then he says
until the seventieth year.
Why?
Because at that moment,
Babylon crossed the red line.
Babylon was destroyed,
the Persian kingdom destroyed it.
What I feel and personally deeply believe,
and you may or may not agree
is that many countries where
our people live have crossed the red line.
Listen to the excellent lecture by the
American exorcist Chad Ripperger
about how when specific
laws are passed that are against God,
literally, that country is handed over
to particular demons who destroy it.
Our people live there.
Remember that Lot fled from Sodom.
There is a red line
after which God cuts off.
This isn't conspiracy theory.
Look at history.
Has any civilization
that became decadent survived?
They all collapsed
That is why the other text
that the Lord has put on my heart
which I put on your heart to pray
Revelation 18:1-8.
It is a comparison with places where many
of our people, unfortunately, live today.
"After this I saw another angel coming
down from heaven. He had great authority
and the earth was illuminated by his
splendor. With a mighty voice he shouted:
“ Fallen! Fallen is Babylon the Great!
She has become a dwelling for demons
and a haunt for every impure spirit, a
haunt for every unclean bird and animal.
For all the nations have drunk
the maddening wine of her adulteries.
The kings of the earth
committed adultery with her
and the merchants grew
rich from her excessive luxuries.”
I don't need to describe it further.
Due to the moral decline,
it becomes a dwelling place of demons
but there is strong economic growth
so all merchants and kings are drunk
by her fornication and her immense luxury.
since the Israelite people are there
the voice of God goes to that people
"Then I heard another voice from heaven:
"Come out of her, my people
so that you will not share in her sins, so
that you will not receive any of her plagues
for her sins are piled up to heaven,
and God has remembered her crimes.
Give back to her as she has given;
pay her back double for what she has done.
This is God's cry, "come out"
Why? By living in such an
atmosphere, we become participants.
Why did Lot and his family
have to leave Sodom?
Because at one point, you can't be in
Chernobyl for so long without being radiated.
Do you understand?
Examine whether the line has been crossed.
Is this what you really
want for your children?
You have somewhere to go.
Where God calls you and
where your roots are.
Return there if you want to be strong.
We started with eradication.
Let's now consider one strong tree.
Parable from the Gospel.
What kind of strong tree is that?
It is rooted.
Do you know what it feeds on?
I am an agronomist, so let me
discuss this with you a little.
It feeds on humus.
Do you know how humus is formed?
Humus is formed through thousands
and thousands of years of organisms dying
and creating organic soil with their
death, which today that tree can eat from.
Also your faith was born
through the suffering and death
of thousands of generations
that we often forget.
Then that tree
nourished in that way,
can grow towards the sky
and feed on the sun through photosynthesis.
That's how we are also called
by God to receive new incentives
with awareness of our roots and
listening to what God wants to give us.
We must become such trees
to fulfill what God requires of our people.
Because as much as the
Israelites enjoyed themselves in Babylon
prospered and became many
and if they were so happy,
they wouldn't have sung Psalm 137
"By the rivers of Babylon we sat
and wept when we remembered Zion."
Their homeland.
"If I forget you, Jerusalem,
may my right hand forget its skill.
May my tongue cling to the roof of
my mouth if I do not remember you,
if I do not consider
Jerusalem my highest joy."
That's what they sang. And so many
of our people inside mourn and die.
As our writer Ivo Andrić said:
"Here I became,
here I will disappear
here I watched the heavenly infinite
and the open sea on which the eye rests.
I wouldn't trade this for any place in the world;
there may be more beautiful ones, but not dearer.
This place, this is me,
this is my life, my love
this is my cradle, my grave,
my beginning, and my end."
I'm not saying quick
decisions should be made tomorrow
but to become aware,
I first address the diaspora.
Your homeland needs you,
it's not too late here
and you enter into the nation
God looks at in a particular way.
If you fear what you will eat
and whether you will have enough
I'll tell you a true story
written by Martin Đurđević
in his memoirs from the Balkans.
When the uprising broke out in Herzegovina
against the Turkish authorities
during the Turkish-Austro-Hungarian war
the people of Herzegovina finally felt
that they would throw off that yoke
Then foreign diplomats came to
negotiate, the British,
you can guess whose side they were
on, on the Turkish, of course, as today.
They are now going to persuade
the insurgents to give up.
This is a true event;
Martin Đurđević conveys that dialogue.
They say: your uprising and actions
are not justified, said the consuls.
Long-suffering justifies our uprising-
the leaders of the rebellion replied.
But the Sultan has the power and the army
to crush you all, the consuls welcomed.
They have crushed us and tortured us
for 500 years, so here we are still alive
to shed our last drop of blood
for freedom, justified the leaders.
And when you eat up that little bread you
have in your bag, what will you eat then?
Threatened the consuls with sanctions.
Mijo Ljuban from Sjekose grabbed
a handful of earth in front of him
put the earth in his mouth
chewed it, and swallowed it
in front of everyone and said:
Here, this is God's food;
it will never run out for us.
They say that English consul Holmes
cried when he saw that sight.
Amen.
Thanks and praise be to God for
everything, I did not speak in my own name
but also in the name of God, I believe,
and in the name of your ancestors
whom I met while driving around Bosnia and
Croatia, through massacre sites, through pits
and felt in my spirit and my heart,
their suffering and pain
and desire and longing for what we are
now living, and which we sell so cheaply.
I do this mostly for them.
God has given me a special love,
a pastoral that is not so common.
There is no larger killing field, encampment
we have not visited, prayed or had holy masses at.
Believe me, what we live in today is paid
dearly and sold cheaply. Don't let that happen.